---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/vault-one/kodekameraten-no/archive/l1/"}
---

# ---
# title: Lecture 1: Introduction and Proofs
# author: Henry S. Sjøen
# date: 2019-02-19T10:00:38+01:00
# draft: false
# tag: math
# description: 
# dg-publish: true
# ---

[MIT | Lecture 1: Introduction and Proofs](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-042j-mathematics-for-computer-science-fall-2010/video-lectures/lecture-1-introduction-and-proofs/)


[Video clip from The Colbert Report](http://www.cc.com/video-playlists/kw3fj0/the-opposition-with-jordan-klepper-welcome-to-the-opposition-w--jordan-klepper/xr6owy)
<div style="background-color:#000000;width:520px;"><div style="padding:4px;"><iframe src="//media.mtvnservices.com/embed/mgid:arc:video:comedycentral.com:9e8db26a-ed00-11e0-aca6-0026b9414f30" width="512" height="288" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true"></iframe></div></div>

> **A mathematical prooof** is a verification of a **proposition** by a chain of **logical deductions** from a set of **axioms**.

$
a=95,800\\
b=217,519\\
c=414,560\\
d=422,481$

$\exists a,b,c,d \in N^+, a^4+b^4+c^4=d^4$

There exists a combination of numbers a, b, c and d so that the sum of $a^4,b^4$ and $c^4$ equals $d^4$.

**Predicate**: is a proposition whose truth depends on the value of a variable.
In the above example $a^4+b^4+c^4=d^4$ is the predicate.

$N^+$: Positive natural numbers

Let us show that the statement is true for some number:

$\exists a,b,c,d \in N^+, a^4+b^4+c^4=d^4\\
a^4+b^4+c^4=d^4\\
95,800^4+217,519^4+414,560^4=422,481^4\\
84229075,9696+2238663363,8463+29535857400,192 = 31858749840,0079
$

The statement is $True$. 

> Factoring is the way to break cryptosystems like RSA.

## The Map problem / Four color theorem
> The regions in any map can be colored in 4 colors so that adjecent regions have different colors.

This man named Guthrie came up with this theorem, and there were many false proofs.

> Proofs by picture are often very convincing and very wrong.

The four color theorem was finally proved by Appel and Haken in 1977.
And they used a computer to check for thousands of cases.

How do you know the computer didn't mess up?

> In mathematics, a "helping theorem" or ***lemma is a proven proposition which is used as a stepping stone to a larger result*** rather than as a statement of interest by itself. 
<!-- > The word derives from the Ancient Greek λῆμμα ("anything which is received, such as a gift, profit, or a bribe").  -->
> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lemma_(mathematics))


A few years ago, someone else made a 12-page human proof, but people are very suspicious of it. The reason for this is because the proof of the main lemma says, "deatils of this lemma is left to the reader. See figure seven."

## Goldbach's conjecture. 1742

> Every even integer but 2 is the sum of 2 primes.

$24=11+13$

Is this true? Nobody knows!  

This is a really simple proposition, but it's not easy to prove.
We still don't know if it's true.

The Globe listed this problem as one of the great unsolved mysteries.

## Soomething else

$\forall n \in Z, n \geq 2 \implies n^2 \geq 4$

> "$Z$" is used for integers and "$\implies$" means implies.

## Boolean algebra
> An implication \\
> $p\implies q$ if p is false or if q is true.

| p   | q   | $p\implies q$ |
| --- | --- | ------------- |
| 1   | 0   | 0             |
| 1   | 1   | 1             |
| 0   | 1   | 1             |
| 0   | 0   | 1             |

> If pigs could fly, I would be King.
> (Pigs fly $\implies$ I'm King.)

This sentence is true. It does'nt matter if I'm King or not.
Because pigs will newer fly. (are you sure???)

> $\forall n \in Z,\\ n \geq 2 \iff n^2 \geq 4$

False: $n = -3$

> $\iff$ means that you have to have an implication both ways.
> ($\iff : \impliedby, \implies$)

| p   | q   | $p\implies q$ | $q\implies p$ | $p \iff q$ |
| --- | --- | ------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| 1   | 0   | 0             | 1             | 0          |
| 1   | 1   | 1             | 1             | 1          |
| 0   | 1   | 1             | 0             | 0          |
| 0   | 0   | 1             | 1             | 1          |

The key is to allways check both ways. 

## Axioms
> An **axiom** is a proposition that is "assumed" to be true.

There is no proof that an axiom is true. You just assume it becouse it's reasonable.

**For Example**: If a = b, b = c then a = c.

Axioms should be:
1. Consistent,
2. Complete.

> **Def.**
A set of axioms is **consistent** if no proposition can be proved to be both *true* and *false*.

> **Def.**
A set of axioms is sayd to be **complete** if it can be used to prove every proposition is either *true* or *false*.

A lot of logicians (Russel, Whitehead) spent their careers trying to find a set of axioms that was both Consistent and Complete.
Then out of nowhere came Kurt Godel and proved that it is not possible (1930s). 

> You can state a problem that you can't prove is true or false.

If you want consistency, then there there will be true facts that you will never be able to prove.
For example: 
Maybe Goldbach's conjecture is true, but not provable?

*"Remember when your parents told you that if you work hard enough, you can do anything? They were wrong!"*